3D pens are analogous to a hot glue gun but can make structures in 3 dimensional space. 
Most pens work on the principle of using a thermal process for softening and melting of the filament material to be extruded through the nozzle of the printing pen. 

These pens use ABS, PLA, FLEXY as a filament with size usually ranging from 1.75-3 mm. Along with these, some pens also support wood, metal and nylon blends.

A 3D pen can be used across diverse disciplines viz. Art, design, engineering, technology and biology. 
It can also be used to repair small scale errors and inaccuracies of the desktop 3D printed objects. In some cases the material to be printed can also be recycled.

The emergence of a 3D pen brings 3D modeling from a screen-based computer-aided design (CAD) system and 3D printing to direct and rapid crafting by 3D doodling. 
However, the only critical challenge in the structural development of the object to be produced is the crafting skills one requires to execute the design. 

A study by Haruki Takahashi and Jeeeun kim suggests that users need support to reduce the number of non-creative tasks to explore a wide design strategy. 
A system of a 3D pen+3D printer was built with the approach of enabling the users to print while doodling to focus on creative exploration.
This study also suggests the use of a Hybrid fabrication by integrating digital fabrication techniques with analog craft practice to extend traditional craft.
This value addition can help with creative freedom through a 3D pen while also offloading non-creative work to a 3D printer.

To lower the entry barrier for users, most general-purpose CAD tools have users work from shape primitives or spline systems, which unwillingly induce a procedural process while a hand-held 3D printer (pen) allows users to directly manipulate 3D shapes on-the-fly without any digital 3D models ready for processing and to modify the modeling process as they make things using craft materials.

Certain ways in which a 3D pen can be an aid to a 3D printer are: [1]  Adding details to a 3D printed body.
[2]  Wireframes can be developed by 3D printing for global shapes.
[3]  Integrating material properties.
[4]  Transforming planar figures to 3D shapes.
[5]  Making functional additives for 3D printed parts.
[6]  Error corrections associated while printing

It is understood that the creative use of craft tools also empowers the artist’s creativity, it is also to be noted that there may be some discrepancies in each object created manually. 
Stringing is a fabrication error common in both 3D printing and 3D pen. It occurs when small strings of plastic are left behind on a 3D printed model. 
This is typically due to plastic oozing out of the nozzle while the extruder is moving to a new location.
Some common practices in avoiding stringing are setting optimum stroke speed, temperature, reducing movement speed and drawing short movements over open spaces. 
Additional polishing step may be required to remove the excess of filament drawn on the surface using a harder sandpaper, this ensures there is uniformity on the surface. Special attention needs to be given while mechanical polishing as it may leed to fracture line development. 

Many 3D pen prototypes have also been proposed to draw thermoplastic electrochemical sensors-electrodes, fabricate bioactive materials for medical applications and to fabricate paper-based analytical devices, etc. 
Commercial PLA filaments containing carbon black or graphene can be used in the 3D pen to extrude the electrodes. 
Lab-made conductive filaments using recycled polymers can decrease even more the cost for obtaining the electrodes using the 3D pen.
