Medical isolation gowns are essential personal protective equipment (PPE) and are perhaps the second most used wearable piece of PPE that prevents the spread of microorganisms and bodily fluids

The majority of isolation gowns do not have a manufacturer-designated shelf life and reusable gowns provide greater protection than disposable gowns, in most cases, and are more economical and sustainable.

Currently, these isolation gowns are really intended to stop blood-borne transmission, not an airborne transmission.

Currently, Washable isolation gowns are made from cotton, polyester and polyester-cotton blends. Such Reusable gowns are typically woven to full size patterns. 

Disposable gowns are also manufactured on a large scale, commonly made from nonwoven synthetic materials such as polypropylene, polyester, or polyethylene.
The usual method of assembling these garments thermal, chemical, or mechanical seaming.

However, reusable gowns provide greater water resistance, strength, and pilling resistance than disposable gowns. This was proved by a research conducted by

Disposable spunbond polypropylene and reusable polyester is a petroleum waste. 
Studies from Forbes, the EPA, National Institute of Health, Wikipedia etc. suggest that Polyester can cause miscarriages, infertility, skin problems, headaches and fatigue if regularly worn against the skin.
Sustainability wise, cotton made wearables should be preferably. 

Generally, microfibers or thin length fibres are widely used for manufacturing these gowns.Fibers with irregular surfaces/ cross-sections and shorter in length are more effective in preventing the transmission of particles
Physically, the length and the surface of the fiber are critical for the barrier properties of the fabric
Chemically, the absorbency of the fiber is critical for liquid transmission properties of the gowns. 
When highly absorbent fibers are present, the fabric absorbs the liquid and as a result, bacteria can be trapped within the fiber structure.
If low absorbent or hygroscopic fibers are used for the gown construction, the liquid will wick along the fiber surface, enhancing capillary movement of liquid which contains microorganisms. 
Natural fibers (e.g., cotton, wool, silk, etc.) have higher absorbency capabilities compared to synthetic fibers, including polypropylene and polyester, which are commonly used for the construction of isolation gowns.

Important fabric characteristics that impact barrier properties include pore and surface characteristics. 
Pore size, geometry, and distribution characteristics change with the fabric construction types (knit, woven, nonwoven). Woven and nonwoven are the two most commonly used fabric construction techniques for isolation gowns. 
Fabrics with smaller pore sizes have improved barrier effectiveness to bacterial transmission. Sometimes, liquid carriers which help move the particle also may act as a lubricant and/or energy provider. Hence, the particle may be transferred through the fabric even if the pore size of the fabric is smaller than the bacterial particle size.
Knitting technology is used generally for most of the reusable gown cuffs. 
The random orientation of the fibers in the nonwoven fabrics successfully reduces liquid transmission by: 
(i) providing filtering media (ii) reducing the capillary formation.
Factors that affect capillary absorption as: 
(i) characteristics of the fluid (surface tension, viscosity and density), (ii) the nature of the surface (surface energy and surface morphology), (iii) interaction of the fluid with the surface (interfacial tension and contact angle), and (iv) pore characteristics (size, volume, geometry and orientation).
The most commonly used nonwoven fabrics for isolation gowns are spunbond and spunbond/meltblown/spunbond technologies.
In addition, product attributes can be enhanced to impart absorbency, slip resistance, additional strength or other desirable characteristics by building composites i.e additional layers of material, coating, reinforcements, or laminates 
